Mr. X
-----
Author: Carl Sagan

This account was written in 1969 for publication in Marihuana Reconsidered
(1971). Sagan was in his mid-thirties at that time. He continued to use cannabis
for the rest of his life.

It all began about ten years ago. I had reached a considerably more relaxed
period in my life - a time when I had come to feel that there was more to living
than science, a time of awakening of my social consciousness and amiability, a
time when I was open to new experiences. I had become friendly with a group of
people who occasionally smoked cannabis, irregularly, but with evident pleasure.
Initially I was unwilling to partake, but the apparent euphoria that cannabis
produced and the fact that there was no physiological addiction to the plant
eventually persuaded me to try. My initial experiences were entirely
disappointing; there was no effect at all, and I began to entertain a variety of
hypotheses about cannabis being a placebo which worked by expectation and
hyperventilation rather than by chemistry. After about five or six unsuccessful
attempts, however, it happened. I was lying on my back in a friend's living room
idly examining the pattern of shadows on the ceiling cast by a potted plant (not
cannabis!). I suddenly realized that I was examining an intricately detailed
miniature Volkswagen, distinctly outlined by the shadows. I was very skeptical
at this perception, and tried to find inconsistencies between Volkswagens and
what I viewed on the ceiling. But it was all there, down to hubcaps, license
plate, chrome, and even the small handle used for opening the trunk. When I
closed my eyes, I was stunned to find that there was a movie going on the inside
of my eyelids. Flash . . . a simple country scene with red farmhouse, a blue
sky, white clouds, yellow path meandering over green hills to the horizon. . .
Flash . . . same scene, orange house, brown sky, red clouds, yellow path, violet
fields . . . Flash . . . Flash . . . Flash. The flashes came about once a
heartbeat. Each flash brought the same simple scene into view, but each time
with a different set of colors . . . exquisitely deep hues, and astonishingly
harmonious in their juxtaposition. Since then I have smoked occasionally and
enjoyed it thoroughly. It amplifies torpid sensibilities and produces what to me
are even more interesting effects, as I will explain shortly.

I can remember another early visual experience with cannabis, in which I viewed
a candle flame and discovered in the heart of the flame, standing with
magnificent indifference, the black-hatted and -cloaked Spanish gentleman who
appears on the label of the Sandeman sherry bottle. Looking at fires when high,
by the way, especially through one of those prism kaleidoscopes which image
their surroundings, is an extraordinarily moving and beautiful experience.

I want to explain that at no time did I think these things 'really' were out
there. I knew there was no Volkswagen on the ceiling and there was no Sandeman
salamander man in the flame. I don't feel any contradiction in these
experiences. There's a part of me making, creating the perceptions which in
everyday life would be bizarre; there's another part of me which is a kind of
observer. About half of the pleasure comes from the observer-part appreciating
the work of the creator-part. I smile, or sometimes even laugh out loud at the
pictures on the insides of my eyelids. In this sense, I suppose cannabis is
psychotomimetic, but I find none of the panic or terror that accompanies some
psychoses. Possibly this is because I know it's my own trip, and that I can come
down rapidly any time I want to.

While my early perceptions were all visual, and curiously lacking in images of
human beings, both of these items have changed over the intervening years. I
find that today a single joint is enough to get me high. I test whether I'm high
by closing my eyes and looking for the flashes. They come long before there are
any alterations in my visual or other perceptions. I would guess this is a
signal-to-noise problem, the visual noise level being very low with my eyes
closed. Another interesting information-theoretical aspects is the prevalence -
at least in my flashed images - of cartoons: just the outlines of figures,
caricatures, not photographs. I think this is simply a matter of information
compression; it would be impossible to grasp the total content of an image with
the information content of an ordinary photograph, say 108 bits, in the fraction
of a second which a flash occupies. And the flash experience is designed, if I
may use that word, for instant appreciation. The artist and viewer are one. This
is not to say that the images are not marvelously detailed and complex. I
recently had an image in which two people were talking, and the words they were
saying would form and disappear in yellow above their heads, at about a sentence
per heartbeat. In this way it was possible to follow the conversation. At the
same time an occasional word would appear in red letters among the yellows above
their heads, perfectly in context with the conversation; but if one remembered
these red words, they would enunciate a quite different set of statements,
penetratingly critical of the conversation. The entire image set which I've
outlined here, with I would say at least 100 yellow words and something like 10
red words, occurred in something under a minute.

The cannabis experience has greatly improved my appreciation for art, a subject
which I had never much appreciated before. The understanding of the intent of
the artist which I can achieve when high sometimes carries over to when I'm
down. This is one of many human frontiers which cannabis has helped me traverse.
There also have been some art-related insights - I don't know whether they are
true or false, but they were fun to formulate. For example, I have spent some
time high looking at the work of the Belgian surrealist Yves Tanguey. Some years
later, I emerged from a long swim in the Caribbean and sank exhausted onto a
beach formed from the erosion of a nearby coral reef. In idly examining the
arcuate pastel-colored coral fragments which made up the beach, I saw before me
a vast Tanguey painting. Perhaps Tanguey visited such a beach in his childhood.

A very similar improvement in my appreciation of music has occurred with
cannabis. For the first time I have been able to hear the separate parts of a
three-part harmony and the richness of the counterpoint. I have since discovered
that professional musicians can quite easily keep many separate parts going
simultaneously in their heads, but this was the first time for me. Again, the
learning experience when high has at least to some extent carried over when I'm
down. The enjoyment of food is amplified; tastes and aromas emerge that for some
reason we ordinarily seem to be too busy to notice. I am able to give my full
attention to the sensation. A potato will have a texture, a body, and taste like
that of other potatoes, but much more so. Cannabis also enhances the enjoyment
of sex - on the one hand it gives an exquisite sensitivity, but on the other
hand it postpones orgasm: in part by distracting me with the profusion of image
passing before my eyes. The actual duration of orgasm seems to lengthen greatly,
but this may be the usual experience of time expansion which comes with cannabis
smoking.

I do not consider myself a religious person in the usual sense, but there is a
religious aspect to some highs. The heightened sensitivity in all areas gives me
a feeling of communion with my surroundings, both animate and inanimate.
Sometimes a kind of existential perception of the absurd comes over me and I see
with awful certainty the hypocrisies and posturing of myself and my fellow men.
And at other times, there is a different sense of the absurd, a playful and
whimsical awareness. Both of these senses of the absurd can be communicated, and
some of the most rewarding highs I've had have been in sharing talk and
perceptions and humor. Cannabis brings us an awareness that we spend a lifetime
being trained to overlook and forget and put out of our minds. A sense of what
the world is really like can be maddening; cannabis has brought me some feelings
for what it is like to be crazy, and how we use that word 'crazy' to avoid
thinking about things that are too painful for us. In the Soviet Union
political dissidents are routinely placed in insane asylums. The same
kind of thing, a little more subtle perhaps, occurs here: 'did you hear
what Lenny Bruce said yesterday? He must be crazy.' When high on
cannabis I discovered that there's somebody inside in those people we
call mad.

When I'm high I can penetrate into the past, recall childhood memories, friends,
relatives, playthings, streets, smells, sounds, and tastes from a vanished era.
I can reconstruct the actual occurrences in childhood events only half
understood at the time. Many but not all my cannabis trips have somewhere in
them a symbolism significant to me which I won't attempt to describe here, a
kind of mandala embossed on the high. Free-associating to this mandala, both
visually and as plays on words, has produced a very rich array of insights.

There is a myth about such highs: the user has an illusion of great insight, but
it does not survive scrutiny in the morning. I am convinced that this is an
error, and that the devastating insights achieved when high are real insights;
the main problem is putting these insights in a form acceptable to the quite
different self that we are when we're down the next day. Some of the hardest
work I've ever done has been to put such insights down on tape or in writing.
The problem is that ten even more interesting ideas or images have to be lost in
the effort of recording one. It is easy to understand why someone might think
it's a waste of effort going to all that trouble to set the thought down, a kind
of intrusion of the Protestant Ethic. But since I live almost all my life down
I've made the effort - successfully, I think. Incidentally, I find that
reasonably good insights can be remembered the next day, but only if some effort
has been made to set them down another way. If I write the insight down or tell
it to someone, then I can remember it with no assistance the following morning;
but if I merely say to myself that I must make an effort to remember, I never
do.

I find that most of the insights I achieve when high are into social issues, an
area of creative scholarship very different from the one I am generally known
for. I can remember one occasion, taking a shower with my wife while high, in
which I had an idea on the origins and invalidities of racism in terms
of gaussian distribution curves. It was a point obvious in a way, but
rarely talked about. I drew the curves in soap on the shower wall, and
went to write the idea down. One idea led to another, and at the end of
about an hour of extremely hard work I found I had written eleven short
essays on a wide range of social, political, philosophical, and human
biological topics. Because of problems of space, I can't go into the
details of these essays, but from all external signs, such as public
reactions and expert commentary, they seem to contain valid insights. I
have used them in university commencement addresses, public lectures,
and in my books.

But let me try to at least give the flavor of such an insight and its
accompaniments. One night, high on cannabis, I was delving into my childhood, a
little self-analysis, and making what seemed to me to be very good progress. I
then paused and thought how extraordinary it was that Sigmund Freud, with no
assistance from drugs, had been able to achieve his own remarkable
self-analysis. But then it hit me like a thunderclap that this was wrong, that
Freud had spent the decade before his self-analysis as an experimenter with and
a proselytizer for cocaine; and it seemed to me very apparent that the genuine
psychological insights that Freud brought to the world were at least in part
derived from his drug experience. I have no idea whether this is in fact true,
or whether the historians of Freud would agree with this interpretation, or even
if such an idea has been published in the past, but it is an interesting
hypothesis and one which passes first scrutiny in the world of the
downs.

I can remember the night that I suddenly realized what it was like to be crazy,
or nights when my feelings and perceptions were of a religious nature. I had a
very accurate sense that these feelings and perceptions, written down casually,
would not stand the usual critical scrutiny that is my stock in trade as a
scientist. If I find in the morning a message from myself the night before
informing me that there is a world around us which we barely sense, or that we
can become one with the universe, or even that certain politicians are
desperately frightened men, I may tend to disbelieve; but when I'm high I know
about this disbelief. And so I have a tape in which I exhort myself to take such
remarks seriously. I say 'Listen closely, you sonofabitch of the morning! This
stuff is real!' I try to show that my mind is working clearly; I recall the name
of a high school acquaintance I have not thought of in thirty years; I describe
the color, typography, and format of a book in another room and these memories
do pass critical scrutiny in the morning. I am convinced that there are genuine
and valid levels of perception available with cannabis (and probably
with other drugs) which are, through the defects of our society and our
educational system, unavailable to us without such drugs. Such a remark
applies not only to self-awareness and to intellectual pursuits, but
also to perceptions of real people, a vastly enhanced sensitivity to
facial expression, intonations, and choice of words which sometimes
yields a rapport so close it's as if two people are reading each other's
minds.

Cannabis enables nonmusicians to know a little about what it is like to be a
musician, and nonartists to grasp the joys of art. But I am neither an artist
nor a musician. What about my own scientific work? While I find a curious
disinclination to think of my professional concerns when high - the attractive
intellectual adventures always seem to be in every other area - I have made a
conscious effort to think of a few particularly difficult current problems in my
field when high. It works, at least to a degree. I find I can bring to bear, for
example, a range of relevant experimental facts which appear to be mutually
inconsistent. So far, so good. At least the recall works. Then in trying to
conceive of a way of reconciling the disparate facts, I was able to come up with
a very bizarre possibility, one that I'm sure I would never have thought of
down. I've written a paper which mentions this idea in passing. I think it's
very unlikely to be true, but it has consequences which are experimentally
testable, which is the hallmark of an acceptable theory.

I have mentioned that in the cannabis experience there is a part of your mind
that remains a dispassionate observer, who is able to take you down in a hurry
if need be. I have on a few occasions been forced to drive in heavy traffic when
high. I've negotiated it with no difficult at all, though I did have
some thoughts about the marvelous cherry-red color of traffic lights. I
find that after the drive I'm not high at all. There are no flashes on
the insides of my eyelids. If you're high and your child is calling, you
can respond about as capably as you usually do. I don't advocate driving
when high on cannabis, but I can tell you from personal experience that
it certainly can be done. My high is always reflective, peaceable,
intellectually exciting, and sociable, unlike most alcohol highs, and
there is never a hangover. Through the years I find that slightly
smaller amounts of cannabis suffice to produce the same degree of high,
and in one movie theater recently I found I could get high just by
inhaling the cannabis smoke which permeated the theater.

There is a very nice self-titering aspect to cannabis. Each puff is a very small
dose; the time lag between inhaling a puff and sensing its effect is small; and
there is no desire for more after the high is there. I think the ratio, R, of
the time to sense the dose taken to the time required to take an excessive dose
is an important quantity. R is very large for LSD (which I've never taken) and
reasonably short for cannabis. Small values of R should be one measure of the
safety of psychedelic drugs. When cannabis is legalized, I hope to see this
ratio as one of he parameters printed on the pack. I hope that time isn't too
distant; the illegality of cannabis is outrageous, an impediment to full
utilization of a drug which helps produce the serenity and insight, sensitivity
and fellowship so desperately needed in this increasingly mad and dangerous
world.

